to know that I could do a day's work. And when I say a
day's work, it would be from sun to sun. And I'd get a
big dollar for it. Just one dollar? Just one
dollar. And that bought your school clothes? And
that helped to buy my school clothes. And I was so
proud of you. Yeah. I was proud to know that I could
be of help to my family. The question I must ask is,
you've taught school for so long, and education
has been at the center of your family and at the
center of your life, because I saw you teach today.
I know you've been retired for a long time, but you
had those kids blooming, just blooming with
discovery. In just one hour, they were
discovering reading, they were discovering
history. And, you know, I think about the kids in
Harlem and Watts and just the kids in Las Cruces,
New Mexico, and I just think that You know, to teach
them the way you teach, to give them this value, I
mean, if you could say something to every school
child in this country, I bet you could say it and get
it across and change their life. What do you think?
Well, I know one thing. Uh-huh. You just stop, and
it's an old saying, a spoonful of sugar... makes
the medicine go down. A
little boy that couldn't write his name today. And
I said, Johnny, sure you can. Now you watch exactly
what I do, Johnny. You watch my hand. Start right
here. It takes time. It takes love and patience.
And I just said, watch it. And he watched. And I went
up real slow. Now lots of children's concept is
quicker and they grasp it. But others are slow. So I
took it very slow with Johnny. And I took two
letters at a time until I had written Johnny. And
then he came along and made his first two letters.
And I said, oh, that is so good. But he just beamed.
He just blossomed. I said, you did a good job,
Johnny. That's good. And then he made eight with
the two letters. And then he came back and made two
more. And I showed you. I did it step by step. I think
what is wrong... where it is true we're living in a
fast age and times change.
But patience
and a desire to learn and a desire for a teacher to
put it over and the love she has for that child can't
be wiped out. They have to admit of all their
educated philosophies that they stick at you,
they can't wipe that out. You have to love. You have
to love. You have to have the patience. You have to
have that push and desire to open the door or the
channel or the eyes of a child that can't see it.
Yes, that's right. Indeed. And when I opened the
door to this little boy. Today. Today. That is
where I lit my candle today. The good book tells
you, if you can light one candle, how much it means.
Well, I lit my candle today. Then the little boy
over here, that I asked him what reading was. Yeah.
And he come down with the little girl that was in the
fifth. She'll be in the fifth grade next year.
She's in the fourth now. She couldn't tell me what
reading was. She didn't know. Yet she'd sat here
and heard all of this discussion. And he came down
with his fist, and he says, it's talk written down
on paper. That was great. And it just thrilled me to
death. And he said, you don't read like that. I was
trying to break the habit of saying, A, this is a
tree. This is the ball. And I was trying to get it
over. And that we had commas was just like a yellow
light. It's a signal light to slow.
That's good. And that was what I was trying. And
who, what, when, where are all question words. And
you ask it like one. You remember him picking that
out? I do. And he said,
can this one too? I said, yes, it sure is. So it
opened the door. It's just like throwing out a
fishing line with a good bait on it. You'll get a
bite. If the bait is good. If the bait is not, it'll
stay there and some will come along and nibble and
off it'll go. But if that bait's good, it's gone.
All right. I threw that line out and he grabbed it
right quick with that reading. He understood.
You did. It was great. I want to ask you a question.
Since you grew up with that kind of value towards
education and then, again, this was before you
went to college to be a teacher that you believed in
teaching like this. I can see that. Yes. Yes, I did.
Because you learned and grew this way. And I just
want to come right out and ask you, do you think this
had an influence on your cousin? I know it was. We
grew up the same thing. And Uncle Sam was one of the
best teachers that ever walked in Blanco County.
Now, there's so much of this stuff that I hear. Oh,
his mother was an educator. They never say an
educator. An educator.
They forget that Sam Johnson was one of the
smartest, quickest-minded men that ever walked.
Now, Aunt Rebecca was good, I grant you. She was
smart
in her way, but not an overall educated person.
Now, I'll take up for her anywhere. She was a
wonderful woman. She had a great influence on me,
and she had a great influence on Linda, and all the
children she touched. But when it come down to the
fundamental facts, none of them could touch Uncle
Sam. Now, Kitty Clyde's mother was a teacher. We
grew up with teachers. This community was
teachers, teachers, teachers. It believes in
education. To me, this is one of the greatest
hearts of education. Right here in the country.
All right. You just take this old school right up
here. I can show you there's more people that's
come out of the Johnson City School that have
doctorate degrees than you'll find in any...
Well, that's a Class B school, and we didn't have
any affiliation until 1948. That's the truth. And
we've got plenty of people that came out with
doctorate degrees. Dr. Emmett Redford today,
down there at the University of Texas. Or Dr. James
Dollyhike, down at... No, at A&M. A&M, Dolly
Height, yeah. Yeah, Dolly Height at A&M. All
right. Neve Clark, Dr. Neve Clark down at A&M. Oh, I
could... There's just a...
Cox, what's his name? Sid. Sid Cox. Yeah. I'm going
to tell you. He was quite a guy, yeah. Well, he was a
folklorist. And I'll tell you, they lost the
pattern when they made him. But they didn't, they
didn't, he was smart. He had lots of brains, lots of
brains.
But these people came out of this small town that
people pass through every day. That's right. And I
think that the people of Johnson City, I think that
part of that reaching out and that value and that
touching each other has been education. I think so
too. I think so because we wanted to show people
that we were something and we would make something
out of this life, that we could do it. I've
got to ask you, when Lyndon began his education
policies, you believe it was coming from this as
well as from the political necessity of the
country. I do know it. And he says that ignorance is
our only enemy. And that is right. It really is our
own enemy. And we... don't want to cultivate it, so
let's kill it. Mm-hmm. Yeah, I would attribute
that, again, this is part of the people. That's
right. That was in him. And I won't tell you. I think
people need to know that. And I think another
thing, of course, they give them a bedtime. I know
they do. But about... all of this program of
feeding the children and Head Start and all of
that. But let me tell you right now, that all stems
from home. What would a kid do? He does well to get up
and catch a bus and come in. What if he had to do like
Linda and the rest of us, ride five miles to school
and get here by 8.30 these cold mornings? And open
eight gates. I want to tell you right now, you'd
either learn your horse to jump them or you'd learn
to ride up and get them open. Your hands are cold,
your feet are cold, and you ride and you hook your
bridle reins over the horn of the saddle and you put
your hands in your pocket and make the old horse
slow. Well, do you think that? And when we started,
he had learned enough German, and we went to work
down on the ranch and had those little Mexicans,
and we got the German and the Spanish mixed up.
Nobody could understand us. Speaking German,
Spanish, neither. And Papa spent half the time
going to school to get us straightened out. That's
the truth for a while. And I think that lemon, all of
this had an effect on lemon. Okay. So you believe in
his heart that one of the attributes of the Johnson
family, and I will give this as a whole, it's not
singled out. It's no person's idea. But as a whole,
you do believe that it was part of the family
structure. I do believe it. I believe it with
everything in my soul and body. We were brought up
to be educated. Let me tell you, there were nine
children in my Grandpa Johnson's family. Every
one of those nine children could do something.
They were educated to do something. Now, Aunt Mary
was a great, great seamstress. In those days, to be
a seamstress, that was something. That was. All
right. And...
Aunt Lucy taught piano. Aunt Frank was an artist.
She did some of the most beautiful work that you
ever looked at. Uncle George was a teacher. Aunt
Jess was a teacher. Aunt Ava was a teacher. Aunt
Kate was a teacher. My daddy did not teach school.
But there's not anybody that won't tell you in this
county that my daddy was one of the best judges of
livestock of anybody that ever was. He was good,
and he was one of the most wonderful ropers that
ever... He served in political, or in cattle
office. What was he now? He was cattle inspector,
tick inspector for years. Right, yeah. All in
South Texas and all through here. All through that
region, yeah. And he also got the first
right-of-ways for the Pertinolis Electric Co-op
that was gotten to put up the lines because people
were afraid of electricity. And my daddy went out
and talked to them. They had faith in him. They knew
that he was an honest, hard-working man. He was not
a politician. He was a home man. And they had faith
in him. And he got the right-of-ways for the
first... Electric lights that came into Johnson
City. A monument. And that was in what year? The
first electricity. Back in 30... 35? 35. About 35.
About 35.
What was the first electric light in Johnson City
to be lit up? It was a little bitty... Oh, TPNL came
in here. TPNL. TPNL. Texas Power and Light with a
little dynamo. Oh. And put it up over there. And
every church had its own little light plant. Oh, I
love that. the school had their own little light
they'd heavy you could burn a 15 watt light bulb in
your room but not anymore because it wouldn't
carry it yeah texas parent life just couldn't
carry it right amazing that's just oh i don't know
it's over there where the old soul house stands an
old hen building really yeah how about that it sure
was
Yeah, but I really believed. Then when you look
back, and then on my mother's side, all of them,
well, my uncle was, Uncle Jay was, worked in a tax
collector's office. He's a deputy sheriff here
for years and years, and worked in the- Well,
that's Jay Johnson. Jay Chapman. Jay Chapman.
Uh-huh. Aunt Mabel was a teacher. Uh-huh. My
mother, so what could you expect? Teachers
everywhere. Everywhere. Everywhere. Yeah, this
community, yeah. And we just, we knew nothing but
to study and to work. So that realization that
ignorance is our worst enemy. That's right. Is
true to heart, because when you were enlightened,
I'm sure, by all of these teachers. Every time you
turned around, if you used the wrong word, they
called you down, if it wasn't for everyone. Yeah.
Of course, they don't do that now. They say it
embarrasses children. But again, this isn't the
sophisticated professorial community where the
old professor takes the book off the shelf. This
was a whole unity group of people who simply valued
knowledge. That's right. And do you know in the
place of, we would get a little old current event
paper every week. Yeah. But when we were young, I
mean, we were in the seventh and eighth grade.
Uncle Sam was, of course, in the House of
Representatives and things, and he would come
back and he'd throw out questions. We'd meet up
there to play. Maybe we wanted to play bingo or not
bingo, croquenole or hearts or something, some
kind of game. Well, in place of getting to play,
he'd give us... topics to discuss. And what do you
think about ownership, government ownership of
railroads? Do you think that they should own our
railroads and tell us how much they're going to
charge us for hauling? All right, you take the
affirmative and you take the negative. He would
use the power of debate, right? Right from the word
go. And he'd set us over here in a room, all right?
There'd be two of us over there and he'd come over
here. Well, what do you think about the League of
Nations? Yeah. What do you think that we should be
doing? You take the affirmative and you take the
negative. You go in that room. All right. What do
you think about Eugene V. Debs, who's come out on
the Socialist Party? What do you think the
socialists have rights in this United States?
What are they going to do? What's it good for?
Question, all right? You take the affirmative.
You take the negative and get going. You go up here
and you pick out. I don't care. You can take out
seniors and ask them things today in our
government. They can't tell you. And say, now, you
tell me what you think. I'll give you five minutes
to get up here and get this written. Knowledge.
Knowledge. Knowledge of everything that's
happening in your world was of importance to you?
It was at that time. We listened. Even the young?
Little folks were seen and not heard. We listened
to what was going on. We had to. And if you didn't
know it, you was called a dumb bunny.
So we just, that's the way we just lived. That's the
only entertainment we had. That's all we had to do.
Was learning. Was learning. Yeah. And he was poked
down us three times a day. Sure. And in between
meals. Right. It was really right. Yeah, I think
so. It's not here today. No. You know, there's that
big movement to go back to basics. But I'm
wondering if anybody really knows what the
definition of basics are anymore. I don't think
so. I don't think so. That bothers me because...
No, honey, when they tell you that 10 is as far as you
need to count, you just as well forget it. Right. If
you meet a certain quota of knowledge by a certain
grade level, then you're okay, rather than to
promote. the expertise in any area. There you are.
It's a crying shame. It's worse than that. Oh, it
is. But, I said before, we're following the
footsteps of the Roman Empire. Just exactly like
they did. We will fall flat on our face. All but
there. We're all but fallen. We're all but fallen.
We're all but there. Yes. It's really a shame.
God. So what do you think people have to offer their
children in the future? What are they going to
offer them? What will they be to offer? The child
gets everything that he has a desire for. Yeah.
Without Any compensation at all? Of what he needs.
Of what he needs. Yeah, that's it. I'm scared. I
want. They wake up in the morning, I want. They go to
bed at night, I want.
I never will forget saying my prayer one night and
asking God, It was getting close to Christmas
time, and old times were hard, and I knew it. We were
having a hard time on the ranch, and I said,
I do hope that you make room for Santa Claus to come
to our house, and he won't forget where we live.
That we live so far back down on the river, and he
could get lost. I can remember just saying that.
But please, God, ask him to bring me just one little
doll that's not homemade. Uh-huh. You wanted to
have... I wanted a little doll that wasn't
homemade. Uh-huh. Ten years old had never had a
doll that wasn't
homemade. Yeah. And tell me that... Uh-huh. We
were not poor. We had everything. I had
everything. I had all the love in the world. I was
the richest one going.
But earthly things were few and full. The
material. The material. We're a material nation
now. I mean, we really are. Everything that we do is
based on what we own and how much more we can get. The
material things were not there. And I will forget
Uncle Clarence went to town, and he bought all the
little girls a doll and put them on the Christmas
tree. But to get this little doll, we each had to say
a speech. And then, or we had to do a dance, or we had
to sing a song.
So again, you had to... Show your own. Own ability
to do. And you didn't. And it wasn't hanging to you
on a silver platter. You earned it.
And what I'm trying to, the point I'm trying to
make, what we did, we worked for. Now, whether we
could say a good speech or whether we could sing a
good song or whether we could do a good dance, we got
up and tried. And we earned that ball for what we had
done. Well, let me ask you another question
because you're a woman. You're a woman in Texas. Do
you feel that you were ever put down or put in your
place as you were growing up in your home? Or that
you were told that you had to be something and you
couldn't be something else? Or how were you
raised? I was told that a lady's place was number
one. OK. B, quiet, polite, courteous.
You're big enough to? You wanted to. You could do
it. All I had to do was say, I can do it. And I did it. So
as far as equal rights in your household, it was
definitely there. Right. Always. Because
there's always a job to do. I have always had all the
power that I ever wanted, because I knew what I
could do. And I darn sure wasn't going to overjump
it, because the more responsibility I took, the
more I was going to have to take. Yeah. And I went, as
Ivy Dildine said, I went just so far Now, I didn't go
any further. Yeah. And I tell you, I didn't. You
know that. I know that, right. I'd come in from
work, work all day like a trooper, and then work at
the house. I'd do a day's work and a half a day after I
got in from work. Uh-huh. And then go to the ranch
and feed and check on the cattle and everything.
Uh-huh. That's enough. I knew when I had enough.
And I said, you can't do it. A question, because I
myself grew up with the hard lot, you might say. But
I ask that a woman's day-to-day, if she's a career
woman, is a job from 8 to 5, let's say. Well, sure,
and we come in and we open up a pizza or we go to get a
frozen dinner and stick it in the thing. That's...
That's the way of life. Do you think that women are
being cheated today because of what's happened,
that they don't see their ancestry? I do. More than
anything in this world. And let me tell you one
thing. They don't know their own strength. They
don't know what they could do if they would try.
Now, I work with girls up at the old ranch. Yes, for
the National Park Service. That's right. They're
on a Monday. I'll guarantee you at 80 years of age, I
can work circles around every one of them. Right.
And never know I've done it. Yes. I'm tired. I'm
tired. Yeah. There are muscles in their body that
haven't ever been stretched. That's right. Yeah.
That's true. It is, I'm sure. And they don't. But
people in other countries, and I have to ask this on
a country and a basic culture question. People in
foreign countries live with less luxury than we
do. Yes, much less luxury than we do. Are they
better off than we are, do you think? Physically,
yes. Physically, yes. Of course, some of them die
young. But it's their fault. And when I say it's
their fault, they just fail to take the precaution
and listen
to what their body tells them. Well, I mean, your
body's been through quite a bit itself, which I
know. Certainly. I mean, you've lost several
children in pregnancy because of the RH factor,
which they didn't know about. Heavens knew
nothing about it. Right, but here your own
grandson, your great-grandchild, your
daughter-in-law went out and had an injection,
and now she can, you know, she went through her
pregnancy fine, so... Yeah, but that I didn't
know. They didn't have it, right. Back in the 40s.
So you had the grief. Yes, I did. And it's something
you don't overcome. If I had a girl today, well,
things would be different. It still hurts. You
wish you'd had a daughter. More than anything. I
know, I can see it. But I have a son. that takes the
place of everybody and everything. That he does.
He is the best thing in this world to me. And I love
him. And I know I love him too dear. Yes. Because I
know that. But that's all I have. Is one child. I
know. One child, no sisters, no brothers. I have
nobody. I know.
But I just hope God takes me before I have to give him
up. I think God's taking care of both of you right
now. On equal grounds. Well, I'm sure that's right
because we're both on borrowed time and we both
know it. But I don't even stop to think about it.
Because when my work's done and I'm through, my
time will be up and I'll know it. But right now, I've
got plenty to do. That's true. I'm going to stop.